# Traducción Automática - Machine Translation
THis repository contains differents projects related to machine translation, which is the task of automatically translating text from one language to another.

# TA_Lab1
This first project is focused on implementing and evaluating different machine translation models. The models are trained on a dataset of parallel sentences in Spanish and Euskera.

For each model the following steps were taken:
1. Data preprocessing: The dataset was preprocessed to create the necessary input and output sequences for the models. This included tokenization, padding, and creating the necessary masks for the transformer architecture.
2. Loading the model and adding LoRA adapters.
3. Training the model using Trainer from Hugging Face, which provides a convenient interface for training and evaluating machine learning models.
4. Evaluating the model using the BLEU score, COMER and CHRF metrics.

# TA_Lab2
The second project is focused on implementing a machine translation model using from auido to text.

- Cuadernos_4_1: It includes the implementation of whisper to transcribe the audio file to portuguese text to evaluate the performance of the model using the WER metric.
- Cuadernos_4_2: It includes the implementation of a whisper model to translate portuguese audio to english text. The performance of the model is evaluated using the BLEU and COMET metric.
- Cuadernos_4_3: It includes the implementation of NLLB to translate the transcriptions generated by whisper from portuguese to english.
- Cuadernos_4_4: It includes a finetuning of the NLLB model using the transcriptions generated by whisper to improve the performance of the model on the task of machine translation.
- Cuadernos_Extension: It includes an extension implementing differents mdoels such as m2m, mistral and t5.